[SEAGULLS]
>> It all merges now.
The images, soft dreams,
and also the many memories
from childhood.
And the memory of that
day, it still glows.
And that gentle but
persistent therapist,
she told me later
that she was utterly
surprised by the words that
finally came out of her mouth,
as though those words
spoke themselves.
>> We think about
things deeply, deeply.
And things touch us deeply.
We feel things deeply.
We're maybe highly sensitive.
>> Highly sensitive.
>> I love the water, but I was
afraid to put my face under.
>> You cried?
>> Yeah, I did.
>> What else do you think about?
>> Well, I think about all
the cruelty in the world,
the injustice, the greed.
I worry about the planet.
And I think about whether
I'm raising my son right.
I'm doing the right thing
with my life.
There's too much noise
rushing over and over.
But despite global warming and
our destruction [INAUDIBLE]..
Things can hurt, but I also feel
love and joy more intensely.
Beauty, music, art-- most of
all, just being in nature.
It all moves me so deeply.
Those memory, images, dreams,
they persisted for two years,
almost asking something of me.
Until I sensed that there
might be some voices here,
others like mine that
needed to be heard.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"ORCHID"]
>> (SINGING) Me and my helmet.
>> Well, I suppose you need to
know a little bit more about
me.
And I am a research
psychologist.
I have been a university
professor in the past,
a published novelist.
And more than anything else,
I'm a highly sensitive person.
I spent most of my life
thinking that how I was
was a problem for people.
And I think I went into
clinical psychology
because I didn't know what
was the matter with me.
>> Right.
>> And I hear that so
many times from people.
>> Well, I knew something was
up when my family was looking
at me somewhat strangely.
Something about that
moment validated a lot
of my having felt
alone in a world
where I felt misperceived
and misunderstood.
>> In 1991, Dr. Elaine Aron made
a major breakthrough when she
identified the trait
of high sensitivity,
a subject that I find
deeply fascinating.
High sensitivity is not a
disorder or a condition.
It is an innate
temperament trait,
and is found in the same
numbers in both men and women.
There is no solid
research on the subject,
from brain studies
to genetic analysis.
The purpose of this
film is to shine light
on the trait of
high sensitivity.
I think you will find it
important to your life.
Maybe yourself or your
spouse or your child
are highly sensitive.
It's not just about the
20%, it's about all of us.
This is "Sensitive--
the Untold Story."
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"ORCHID"]
>> I always knew that there was
something different about me,
but I didn't know what it was.
Certainly, my parents had no
clue about my sensitivity.
I was forced into
a lot of situations
that were really bad for me.
I couldn't understand why
I couldn't learn to swim.
Every year, I had to
take swimming lessons.
And every year,
everyone in the class
learned to swim, except me.
It was because I was very
sensitive to the water
in my face and in my ears.
And I was afraid to put my
head under because, gee,
I'd been told a million
times, don't drown,
don't go too near the water,
you might fall in and drown.
And all of a sudden, I was
supposed to put my head in it?
So that's the kind of conundrums
that sensitive children
get into because they're
being asked by their parents
to do things that are hard for
them but easy for other kids.
And then the parents
go into this place of,
there's something
wrong with my kid.
>> Like many sensitive children,
Elaine excelled in school
and went on to earn
her master's degree,
and then her doctorate
in psychology.
So as both a psychologist
and a sensitive person,
she was listening carefully
when that counselor told her
she might be highly sensitive.
>> That's when I decided
to do these interviews.
They You put up
posters and said,
are you highly sensitive
or introverted.
Because at the time I thought,
maybe this is introversion.
Another source of
information about this
came to me through
the clinical world
and through Carl Jung,
who studied introversion.
I thought maybe it
was the same thing.
So I did these interviews.
And I quickly discovered for one
thing that 30% of these people
were extroverts.
So I wasn't studying
introversion,
I was studying something else.
>> While Elaine was focusing her
research sensitivity in adults,
others were researching it
in animals and children.
Unbeknownst to each other, they
were all on the same track.
A revolution was in the making.
>> I began to look at other
places where temperament was
studied with
infants and animals.
The biologists were saying
that this trait persisted
in humans and over 100
other species, and about 20%
of individuals in each
species, because it
has survival advantages
in situations where
paying attention is valued.
20% of individuals
in all these species
couldn't possibly represent
a disorder or simply
a disadvantage for survival.
>> And Elaine Aron, of course,
not working with children,
working with adults, came to the
notion of the sensitive person.
And the sensitive person had
many of the characteristics
that my work in child
development pointed out
would make a person more
sensitive, being in the infant
and toddler case highly
negative emotional and difficult
temperament, i.e.,
appearing to have a highly
sensitive nervous system.
>> Well, would you
say you cry easily?
Of course, a variety of
theories about the details
are springing up, waiting
for more scientific research.
>> Our observation, our theory
and belief about these highly
reactive, biologically
susceptible children is that
that susceptibility grows out
of a combination of genetic
and environmental influences.
We believe, for a
variety of reasons
that are grounded in
solid science now,
that children, even in the
womb, even in prenatal life,
are sensing things about the
environment in which they're
going to be born, and are
adjusting, moving up and down,
their responsivity to
various characteristics
of the environment based
on that anticipation.
>> Adults, children, animals--
these allow us to
see sensitivity
from three different
perspectives.
Dr. Maya Braem Dube from Bern
University in Switzerland
is currently conducting research
on highly sensitive dogs.
>> So this topic is
very important to me.
It's always been important
to me because I've always
been drawn to animals.
And I've always felt very close
to them, and the sensitivity,
of course, because I can
empathize with them because I
went through it myself.
And I see in my
behavior practice
how often animals are not
understood in their needs,
and I think they're
suffering because of that.
And they often
don't have a choice
but to suffer or to show
it as a behavior problem
so that they need
more understanding
of the environment to help cope.
And ideally of
course if you could
catch that before
they develop problems
and you could adapt your
interactions, your environment,
to the animal, you
might be able to prevent
some problems from happening.
And also, it's very
important to me,
and what I like about
Elaine Aron's work,
is that it's not defined as
something wrong or a pathology
or a sickness or an illness
or a disease or a syndrome.
It's part of a personality
that's just a bit different.
And it has its positive
sides as well, not just
its negative sides.
>> And what Elaine recognized
early on is that this is
a trait that has
both ups and downs.
And she also recognized
that the core of that
was not being upset by
things, but noticing things
more intensely.
>> I'm pleased
about these results.
They're so varied, and people
find that quite amazing.
>> The trait was being studied
extensively in rhesus monkeys
by Dr. Stephen Suomi at the
National Institutes of Health
in Maryland, who is world
famous for his research.
>> We can see some real
similarities between
the individual humans that
Elaine Aaron calls sensitive,
highly sensitive,
and the monkeys,
those individual monkeys that
we call uptight in that they are
both very responsive to minor
changes in their environment.
They pick up things
in their environment
that other monkeys and other
people largely miss or ignore.
And we think that
this is in part
due to some
underlying differences
in their genetic makeup.
>> When you study sensitivity
eventually converge,
even though working in different
contexts and sometimes using
different terms, my specialty
has always been the study
of the process in adults.
One advantage of studying
adults is that you cannot study
the process without brain
scans or using questionnaires.
>> Adding the task of explaining
the truth to the public,
which seemed impatient to
hear more about the research,
Elaine wrote "The Highly
Sensitive Person,"
an international bestseller
which has been translated
into 18 languages.
Something of a
movement has grown up
around those who call
themselves, quote, "HSPs,"
with all the intended discussion
of it on the internet,
much of it useful and
some of it way out there.
To help clarify what she sees
as the essence of the trait
in 2012 in her book
for professionals,
she summarized the
trait as having
four key characteristics,
using the acronym DOES.
This stands for
Depth of processing,
Overstimulation, strong
Emotions and empathy,
and Sensitivity to subtleties.
>> HSPs showed more activation--
>> Right.
>> Than the non-HSPs.
>> Of the four characteristics,
this strategy of processing
or reflecting on information
more deeply or elaborately is
most basic.
It's behind all the
sensitive behaviors
one sees in animals
and children.
Yet deep processing cannot
in itself be actually seen.
I observed both my
son and my nephew
on their first day
of preschool standing
at the back of the room.
I knew they weren't
afraid, they were
watching, because they'd never
seen so many children and toys
in one place.
But both times, the teachers
walked up to them and said,
oh, are you afraid, are you shy.
And so those labels
kind of fell onto them.
So labels of fearfulness
and all these difficulties
are applied to sensitive people,
even when they don't apply.
>> If you identify kids that
show a particular behavior,
and the behavior
might be very quiet,
you might easily come to think
that this is a shy kid and make
certain assumptions
about what that means.
You might think the
kid isn't interested,
or you might assume the
kid is not bright enough
to pick up what's going on.
But those could all be wrong.
It might just be that this
is a highly sensitive kid.
And this is a kid who observes
quietly and takes things in,
rather than being
very behaviorally
outgoing and easily readable.
>> Hi sweetie,
how are you doing?
>> Good.
>> You want to play
with them a little bit?
>> I was never understood
when I was a child at home.
Nobody listened to
me, what I had to say,
and cared about how I
felt. It was not important.
I was crazy and I
was too sensitive
and I was taking
things too deeply--
and stop crying, and just
constantly pushed away,
so I was by myself.
And I was always called the shy
person, I was the introvert.
I would always sit
back and I would watch.
>> Shyness is the fear
of social evaluation.
And so it's often been
mixed up with sensitivity
because lots of sensitive
people can become shy.
Why?
Because they're a minority.
And therefore people often
treat them a little differently
because maybe they're
overstimulated
when they show up at a party
and they don't have anything
to say.
>> So when a child is
introverted or shy,
or someone what we
call slow to warm up,
all of those things can
be misinterpreted as being
something autistic or
on the autistic scale,
or even Asperger-ish, when
indeed there's nothing going
on here around
Asperger's or autism.
There's been a
misdiagnosis and the child
is simply highly sensitive.
>> Of course, we do not want
to imply that every case
of shyness or what's
called social phobia,
or every case of autism, in
which you also see a problem
with overstimulation, or a
case of any other disorder,
is actually always a highly
sensitive individual who was
misdiagnosed and is really
just highly sensitive.
But there's another
error we can make--
someone could think that
a symptom is entirely
due to high sensitivity
when it really
is a sign of a real disorder.
And the third possibility
is that a person
is highly sensitive
and has a disorder too.
Gaining more clarity
about this trait
is what makes the
research so important.
And parents who are not sure
can always get an evaluation.
But you don't get an evaluation
from someone who only sees
autism spectrum disorder
and knows nothing about
temperament, just as you
wouldn't want to take the child
to someone only knew
about temperament
and couldn't
recognize Asperger's.
>> Elaine feels none of her
results would have reached
the light of day without
her husband, Art Aron,
a well-known researcher of
love, as well as of sensitivity,
perhaps best known for his
36 questions from one of his
studies that then went viral
as a method to fall in love.
At Stony Brook
University, he and Elaine,
along with a number
of collaborators,
used brain imaging while
subjects did a task
to uncover depth of processing.
>> We've got a lot of research
underway at the moment.
We've got a couple new fMRI
studies, neuroimaging studies,
brain imaging studies
we're conducting.
>> These findings show that
highly sensitive individuals
are not pausing in novel
situations because they're shy
or they're scared or they're
putting on the brakes
to engaging in a situation.
In fact, what they're
doing is they're
engaging systems
of their brain that
are associated with awareness,
depth of processing,
integration of the other
person in the self,
emotional meaning-making, so
that then they can respond
to their needs appropriately.
>> So yes, this is basically
a rendering of this particular
individual's features
based on the skull.
>> There you go.
>> Bianca Acevedo also
did a careful inspection
of the amygdala, a part of
the brain that activates when
a person experiences
fear and anxiety.
And it was not activated in a
highly sensitive during task
when it might have
been, clarifying
that these people are not by
nature socially anxious or shy,
a result found in
other studies too.
Meanwhile, people
of all walks of life
are discovering what the
trait is really all about.
>> [SPEAKING DANISH]
>> I play team handball, and
it's a very fast sport where
everything moves very quickly.
If you're really
sensitive, you don't really
need to see everything
because you're sensitive
and you can feel what
is happening around you.
And you can really be aware and
anticipate where the others are
without really seeing them.
>> [SPEAKING DANISH]
>> Not all depth of
processing is conscious,
making it much like intuition.
That is, we can know something
without knowing how we know it.
>> You can't learn that just
by visualizing or doing mental
exercises.
You are born with that.
And I find that as
a very special gift.
>> Naturally, if you're
processing everything
in the environment more
deeply, more thoroughly,
you are more easily
overstimulated.
>> Yeah, yeah, baby, did
you see that touchdown?
>> Yep.
>> We got the win.
Baby, what's wrong?
That was a great game.
>> I didn't say I
didn't enjoy it.
I just want to get home.
>> Even though everybody
was excited, we got the win.
>> Yeah, that's great.
It's just it was so noisy.
>> Oh, not the
noise thing again.
I mean, it bothers you when I
jingle my keys in front of you.
>> I've already
apologized for that.
>> Overstimulation is what
others close to the highly
sensitive may notice most, and
what might really frustrate
or confuse them.
>> Basically, everything
about life is overwhelming.
And even something as simple as
walking on the street outside
can be like, oh, there's
people driving by me
and they're looking
at me right now.
And you're very aware of
things, super aware of things.
>> We reach a threshold
that is much lower.
We see things, we feel
things, we perceive things,
we process things deeper.
It's a balancing act to be
able to be out in the world.
>> The problem is always finding
the right balance between how
much time to be out in the
world and how much to pull back
for a while.
Sensitive people have a
lot they want to offer.
They're curious,
often highly creative.
But they do need their downtime.
Once they understand this,
they begin to plan for it.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"ORCHID"]
>> (SINGING) Me and my helmet,
such an unconventional kid,
all intense.
>> Now that I've met
Alanis Morissette,
I find her a perfect example.
She's been writing songs
since she was nine years old.
And as she grew as a songwriter,
the overstimulation grew.
As one example, her album
"Jagged Little Pill"
sold 30 million
copies worldwide,
leading to outright adulation.
>> On one hand, my traits
and these qualities were seen
as really positive and a boon,
and something that people were
frothing at the
mouth to exploit.
And then in the
same breath, it was
something that was sort of
the bane of my existence
and a challenge for
people to deal with.
>> That's exactly the way I
describe the package deal,
that people want the positive
side of the sensitivity,
and then they want you to
get rid of the negative side.
And you can't get rid of it.
>> Lord knows, I've tried.
I thought, OK, so you
don't like the feeling
part, the intense
feelings that I have, OK.
I'll be the needless robot
that you want me to be.
But of course, there was
a great misperception
of my approach to life as being
too high-maintenance and too
emotional and too-- a lot
of too much, too intense.
And so I spent most
of my life thinking
that how I was a
problem for people.
Yet at the same time, I
was getting the message
that what it was that I was
coming to specifically because
of my trait, they wanted that.
They wanted the outcome
and the fruit of my trait,
but they didn't want my trait.
So it was an
interesting combination
of being loved for it and
being rejected for it.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"ORCHID"]
(SINGING) I'm a
sweet piece of work,
well-intentioned and unloved,
unlabeled and misunderstood,
treated like a
rose as an orchid.
You've brought water to me.
>> The work of what
you do is very intense.
And we know a lot of stars
burn out in terrible ways.
>> How am I not dead?
My lifestyle was not
very conducive to care
for the HSP for a
really long time.
And so I would just go
through moments of having
meltdowns and breakdowns.
And I would keep them
private because I
didn't want to be a bother.
But that was my way of doing it.
I'd go a month or
two really hard.
And then I would crash.
And there were times
where I didn't know,
I didn't have the
maturity or the experience
enough to create a day
or two after a show
or after a big event.
Oftentimes, I would
just careen right
into the next event
or the next interview
or the next show
or the next video.
And it was hard on my body.
I developed a really fiery
version of work addiction
that I've been in
recovery for a while.
And in being in recovery
for work addiction,
I have found myself
really caring
for this highly
sensitive part of me.
>> Alanis Wrote "That
I Would Be Good"
as a reflection of her being
a highly sensitive person.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
>> (SINGING) That I would be
good, even if I did nothing.
I wrote "That I Would
Be Good in my closet,
because I was so overwhelmed.
My home became this
Grand Central Station.
And I remember there having
been 10 people downstairs.
And so I hid in my
closet, of all places.
And I remember lighting a
candle on the floor in my closet
and writing "That I Would
Be Good" as a prayer,
like a meditation that I could
listen to that would soothe me
in times of overstimulation
and maxing out
and not having had enough
time alone or breaks.
And it was just
like a gentle balm.
>> Overstimulation is a serious
disadvantage of the trait--
true.
But Alanis told us about
the emotional responsiveness
and empathy she can feel with
her highly sensitive audience
that makes her feel so
authentic as a performer.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
>> (SINGING) That I would be
good, even if I did nothing.
So there were some
songs that even when
I would perform them on stage
around the planet when we would
tour, immediately the first
few chords would play,
and I would just feel this
huge relief wash over me.
And I could just see
the sweet HSP faces.
A lot of them, a lot of the
HSPs are right up front.
And so there's a lot of
emotional crying and fervor
and passion.
And we would just be
married to each other.
I would be a lot of
physical catharsis on stage.
And then I would see the effect
of it in the people's faces
in the audience.
So it was really
gratifying in that way.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
>> (SINGING) That
I would be good,
e if I lost my
hair and my youth.
>> If you think being emotional
means being irrational,
actually, the latest thinking
is that emotions generally lead
to better thinking, because
we only think thoroughly about
something we care about.
>> Dr. Robert Levenson at
the University of California,
Berkeley, is well known for
his research on emotion.
>> One of the things if
you study emotion that
you're struck by is just
how different people are
in the size of the emotions they
have and the frequency at which
they become emotional.
>> One of the things that highly
sensitive people report is that
they cry easily.
Now other people
also cry easily,
but it seems to be in general
more true of highly sensitive.
Why would that be?
Well, if you're processing
information more thoroughly,
then the same thing
that might not quite
make someone else cry because
they're not quite attending
to it in as much detail is going
to make the highly sensitive
person cry.
>> These findings also show that
highly sensitive people show
greater activation in areas that
are associated with empathy.
So in at least 20 or
30 studies of empathy,
people showed activation
in certain areas
that highly sensitive
people are also
engaging to a greater degree
in response to their partners
and to stranger's emotions.
>> When I walk into a room, I
know what everyone is feeling.
I know if someone
has had a bad day,
I know if someone is
arguing with their wife.
It can be overwhelming.
And at a period of time, I
couldn't leave my house at all
when I lived in Los Angeles
because I'd walk out my door
and feel the feelings
of eight million people.
And so I'd run
back into my house.
But I really, really love
that I noticed things
that other people don't notice.
It helps me being an antenna for
the world through my writing.
I know what's going on and
what people need to hear,
and then I can write about it.
So I've turned it sort of
from a curse and a bad trait
into something that is helpful
to myself and to others.
>> Empathy means we can
understand what the other
person is feeling
and be supportive.
We can also use empathy
to help ourselves,
maybe to develop our
professional reputation
by sensing, for example,
what our clients
or students or patients
need, even before they do.
>> Extensive brain imaging
conducted by Jadzia
Jagiellowicz during her
doctoral studies at Stony Brook
University and published in
"Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience" show that
the areas of the brain
for understanding subtle cues
are more active in sensitive
than non-sensitive persons.
>> What this study means is that
highly sensitive people notice
more about the
world they live in.
But the key thing is not
just that they notice more,
they take what they
notice and they combine it
with information that they've
noticed all their life.
So because they've noticed
more all their life,
and because they're able to
combine all that information,
they often come up
with unique new ideas.
>> Combining ideas in novel ways
is the essence of creativity.
Even experiences while young,
such as with different animals,
may lead later to
creative insights
about all animals and
their temperaments.
Or, combining novel
ideas might bring
about new research
breakthroughs,
revolutionary art, or
world-changing insights.
We are not saying that all
creative people are highly
sensitive, but surely the
qualities we see in them do
contribute substantially
to creativity.
Another striking
finding was that there
was more activity for sensitive
people in the insula, part
of the brain often called
the seat of consciousness,
because it brings
together all of our inner
and outer experiences.
>> Highly sensitive individuals,
they're engaging the insula
to a greater extent because
in some ways it's like
they're more aware.
And this is in line with a
lot of the other research
and theory on sensory
processing sensitivity,
suggesting that highly
sensitive people are more aware
of others.
They are more aware
of the subtleties
in their environment.
>> These four qualities
we just explored--
depth of processing, being
easily overstimulated,
being more emotionally
responsive,
and sensing the subtle
in the environment--
they add up to highly
sensitive people,
especially in childhood, being
more affected by everything
that happens to them,
not just bad things,
but good things too.
And these three
lines of research--
mine, Jay Belsky
and Michael Pluess,
and Tom Boyce and
Bruce Ellis, we've
all converged on the same idea
of this wonderful trait that's
underneath the hood, that
can't be seen easily.
So it's not been described that
much by the general public.
You can't look at
someone and say, oh,
that person is sensitive
and that person is not.
Now people can
begin to understand
a child or a parent or a
friend or a spouse who's
highly sensitive, but they
didn't understand at first.
Jay Belsky and Michael Pluess
came up with this phrase--
differential susceptibility.
>> Differential susceptibility
is a fairly new concept that
refers to individual
differences in how we respond
to the environments
that we are exposed to.
Susceptibility is a fancy
word for sensitivity.
So basically it
refers to the notion
that some people are more
sensitive to experiences
they meet than other people.
Environmental sensitivity is one
of the most fundamental traits
found in humans,
but in many species.
And it's so fundamental that we
don't even think much about it.
But most of the concepts
we look at that focus
on individual differences
contain the notion
that some people are
more affected by what
they experience than others.
Hence, my conclusion
or proposition
is that people
differ fundamentally
in how they perceive and
process environmental features,
with some being
generally more and some
being generally less sensitive.
Having a higher
degree of sensitivity
has advantages and
has disadvantages.
>> Highly sensitive persons
process all experience more
deeply.
So when we have unsupportive
childhoods that are negative,
when we didn't get the
responses from the parents
when we were very young, when we
didn't believe they would come
when we cried, when our
needs weren't taken care of,
that simply laid the
foundation for later life--
feeling more fearful, being
afraid to venture out and try
new things.
For those individuals
on the other side of it
who had supportive childhoods
where the parents provided
the nurturing,
provided the love,
provided the attention
that people need,
they had a strong
base to build on.
So when they ventured
out into life,
they felt more free,
more confident.
And when they faced
a setback, they
were more easily able
to bounce back from it.
>> So if someone is very
highly sensitive and is exposed
to very adverse environments,
then that person is more likely
to develop depression, because
that person is more affected
by that particular experience.
But the positive aspect is that
if they experience support from
their environment-- that could
be psychological therapy,
that could be social support--
they are more likely to
benefit from that support.
>> So now my counsel is,
what you should tell people--
pediatricians, counselors,
neonatologists--
that some kids have more
difficult temperaments,
but they are much more
malleable clay in your hands.
They are going to
thrive and flourish
if you care for them
well, more so than others.
But they are going
to suffer and go down
if you care for them poorly.
So you are much more,
it seems, the conductor
of this orchestra in those
cases than in other cases.
But will that get through?
Will people embrace this?
Time will tell.
>> Think deeply, think
deeply, feel things deeply.
>> Sometimes I will
and sometimes I won't.
>> Another school year, and you
had another teacher calling us
to tell us there's something
wrong with our son.
You've got to stop
overprotecting him, Pam.
I won't have it.
>> But I'm not
overprotecting him.
He's only seven years old.
Teacher just wants
us to go down there
and discuss a couple
things with us.
>> If Hank is being bullied, he
needs to stand up for himself.
>> Bill, she never said anything
about him being bullied.
>> Well, then what's
the problem this time?
>> I'd say that all the adult
highly sensitive people I know,
most of them will say their
parents didn't understand them
and that they're spending a
lot of time sorting that out.
>> Well, I knew something was
up when my family was looking
at me somewhat strangely.
And I remember probably
about 10 years ago, my father
and I were sitting down, I
was hosting a show in Canada.
And he was having a moment, and
I was crying about something
intense for me, which
he'd gotten used to,
I suppose at that point.
He said to me, he said,
Alanis, I'm so sorry,
we just never really
knew what to do with you.
We were at a loss.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
(SINGING) That I would be
loved, even when I numb myself.
That I would be good, even
when I am overwhelmed.
Something about that moment
in his authentic expression
of that to me, it
validated a lot
of my having felt
alone in a world
where I felt misperceived
and misunderstood.
And I knew that there were
a handful of things that,
if they were taken into
consideration, that I
would be my best self
really consistently.
And equally, if I were to
be in environments where
I was shamed for
what I now see is
talents and a gorgeous
trait, frankly,
had I been in environments
where it had been supported,
it would have been
a lot easier for me
and I wouldn't have
felt so shame-ridden.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
(SINGING) That I would be good.
>> Alanis now enjoys advocating
for causes she has found to be
of central importance.
One is attachment parenting.
Also, because like her, her
son is highly sensitive,
she is deeply interested in
parenting sensitive children.
Alanis told me that she
and her husband, Souleye,
know that one key to
parenting their son,
Ever, is, in Alanis's words,
honoring his every feeling
and letting him feel it through.
Another is preventing his
becoming overstimulated.
If Alanis and Ever
both need down time,
then Souleye, not having
the trait himself,
can readily take over--
teamwork.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"THAT I WOULD BE GOOD"]
Overstimulation can lead to all
kinds of problems in children--
irritation and even tantrums.
>> Do you want me to carry you?
>> I would throw these tantrums
as a kid where I would just be
so overwhelmed.
And there were points where I
would be on the ground crying,
freaking out all the time.
>> There's a lot of parents
out there that would be really
embarrassed by that behavior
where their child is fine one
minute and the next minute
they're freaking out
on the ground,
crying, screaming.
So instead of
responding to the fact
that, oh, she's just
overwhelmed, this is too much,
there's too much
information coming in,
there's too much sight,
there's too much sound,
there's too much
texture, there's just
too much stimulation,
they see their child
as all of a sudden becoming bad.
They discipline them,
they're embarrassed.
They might get a spanking.
All unnecessarily if they
knew that their child was
a highly sensitive person.
>> Of course, it's always true
that parents should set limits
with any child.
But we all learn better when in
our optimal state of arousal,
neither under or overstimulated.
A stern message may help
to get a less sensitive
child's attention, but it can
so overstimulate sensitive
children that they cannot
process the moral lesson behind
the correction.
Sometimes, you have
to wait until later
to discuss what happened and
what they should do next time.
Often, that's all it takes.
>> What's interesting is that
the percentage of men and women
who are highly
sensitive are equal.
But because in
most cultures, men
aren't supposed to
show their emotions,
it's really hard
for sensitive boys.
>> I had a father who
was hardcore military.
And I remember when
I was six years old
and I had a little fight
in the neighborhood,
and he locked me out
of the house and said,
you're not coming back in this
house until you kick his ass.
So I knew that I had to stand
up and struggle and fight and be
a man and not really
show a softer side.
And so I think in his eyes
he had to toughen me up.
>> Most sensitive
males, especially,
have a really hard
time growing up,
because they don't fit in with
the so-called boy code culture.
And a lot of times
when a boy expresses
with a group of other boys,
oh, I'm afraid of something
or I'm scared or I'm
sad or I'm anxious,
they get ostracized
and humiliated.
>> I know what the
problem is, woman.
Whether you do or not, in this
world a man has to be strong.
Now he needs to defend himself
when he handles himself
with other boys.
He needs to get outdoors,
play some sports.
>> But he does want
to play sports.
He's interested in track.
>> Track?
Great.
So he can learn how to run
away, how to run away faster.
>> When a parent is not highly
sensitive and does not realize
that the child is
highly sensitive,
you will feel that maybe
I have to push him more.
And when he pushes the child
more, the sensitive child will
feel, oh, I'm not
accepted like I am,
He doesn't like me if I
need to have some more time.
And like that, he
will become more
unsecure in his
relationship to the father.
And he will maybe
be even less stern
than he would otherwise be.
>> My father couldn't
talk about it.
My mother couldn't
We couldn't talk about it.
And they couldn't
frame it in a way that
would have been
beneficial for me
in order for me to understand
myself, understand my emotions,
and not reacting with
the anger instead.
Because when you're
frustrated and you can't talk
about things, you get angry.
That's how I was raised.
>> He needs to get in there
and tackle things-- football,
basketball.
>> Bill, Bill.
This isn't you.
Don't you remember
how loving you
were to him when he was a baby?
Now he just fears you,
always shouting and hollering
all the time.
>> For one thing, just think
of the cost of messing up
a sensitive child because
they're going to have this
depression anxiety and various
problems their whole lives,
versus getting it right
and having them being some
of the most productive,
thoughtful members of society.
And what do we need in society?
People who think deeply, have
strong emotional response
at the same time.
So we said, good
heart, a deep mind,
sensitive to subtleties so
they notice what's going on.
We need more of those
people everywhere.
One of my favorite stories
of successful parenting
of a sensitive child is that
of social psychologist Steve
Wright, a friend and colleague
from Vancouver, Canada,
a father who is definitely
not highly sensitive himself.
>> My older daughter is not
a highly sensitive person.
And so for two years,
I've been dealing
with this bubbling
baby who just wanted
to go out and be everywhere.
And then Reesa showed up and
things were very different.
>> Hi, I wanted to go there.
[INAUDIBLE]
Good-bye.
>> I wondered what
we were doing wrong.
I wondered why she wasn't happy.
I wondered why she
was scared of people,
or at least I thought
she was scared of people.
So yeah, it was
difficult in the sense
of feeling like that
she was sad too much,
or that she was
worried too much,
or that she wasn't happy about
the things that we were doing,
or that I was doing
things that were
making her feel unsafe or feel
sad or scared or whatever.
>> When I was younger, it was
really hard for me to make
friends.
And because I wouldn't
want to be the first person
to go and talk to someone.
And if the other person
was shy or more reserved,
I wouldn't go up to them.
I would wait for people
to come and talk to me.
>> The big thing for Reesa was
that when we go to new places,
she needed time.
>> My dad is the
complete opposite to me.
He's really encouraging
me to do things and always
in a positive way.
But for me, sometimes,
it's too much.
>> No.
>> So that was really
hard on me, too,
because then I felt as if I
was letting them down and I
wasn't stepping up, and I wasn't
putting myself out there and I
wasn't talking to everybody.
So I felt really bad on myself,
and it was really hard on me.
>> It was a really good
learning lesson for me.
Reesa is not like me, and that
that's perfectly all right.
And that's a really
good way to be.
And here I had been doing
all these things like,
talk to the man, come on, say
hello, tell him your name.
Or, shake her hand or give
her a hug or whatever.
And I realized this is
just totally unfair.
>> So for both of us, we have
to stop and think about how
the other person sees things,
and we have to work together,
talk it out, and say, I feel
like this, I know how you feel,
but this is how I feel.
So we both have to
talk and we both have
to express our sides
of it for us to be
able to get through things.
>> So some parents learn early
to understand their sensitive
child and adapt their parenting,
even if with some difficulty.
Others are more
threatened by the idea.
>> So what's up, Mrs. Wilbur?
>> Your son seems
a little withdrawn,
maybe even depressed.
>> He needs to learn to
stand up for himself.
>> Maybe.
It could be-- or
I wondered if he
was one of those kids
that was born sensitive.
>> Sensitive?
Great, that's all I need
is to be labeled sensitive.
It sounds like a girl.
>> There's just as many boys
as there are girls that are
sensitive.
>> They call it something else.
>> Let's call it, Bill.
Look, I'm going to
say something now.
Bill, I think you're
highly sensitive yourself--
emotional, irritable at times.
You're a perfectionist,
always deep in thought.
You want to be your own boss.
I know it's what
attracted me to you.
And I know now that you're
just worried that Hank
is going to be like you.
And you want him to
cover it up, like you
have been your entire life.
>> Differential susceptibility
causes some children to be more
affected than others
by their environment,
both positively and negatively.
And the same differential
susceptibility
occurs in the work environment.
Some work environments bring out
the best in sensitive people,
some definitely don't.
This can cause
some organizations
to lose their best employees.
And society failed to make
use of one of its greatest
strengths.
I sort of say that
workplaces are like families.
There are good ones
and not very good ones.
And sensitive
people are bothered
more by abusive supervisors
or just negative supervisors
or negative coworkers.
And so they end up needing to
quit, and they have to quit.
Of course, the one problem
for the highly sensitive
is being easily overstimulated,
especially at work.
One study found that
supervisors were
most pleased with their
highly sensitive workers.
>> Yep, I'll be there.
>> But these workers themselves
had the lowest well-being.
>> When there are negative
events that are occurring,
highly sensitive persons tend to
react in a very overstimulated
fashion, because we absorb that
negativity much more deeply
than a non-highly
sensitive person.
>> Since some corporate cultures
or individual managers may not
yet have realized the importance
of supporting their sensitive
employees' needs, these
employees themselves must do
what they can to
prevent burnout,
which often requires
standing up for themselves,
because they usually
are highly valued.
And generally they need
to be careful about taking
good care of themselves.
>> But If we don't
practice really a rigorous,
almost religious
form of self-care,
we really set ourselves up
for a number of health issues,
number of behavioral issues, a
number of emotional issues that
can affect our entire lives,
our entire sense of well-being.
>> The world gets
more high-paced,
it seems like they
can't keep up.
But they actually
can't keep up, as long
as they get the few things they
need in the workplace, which
is a little bit
of peace and quiet
and a little bit of
positive reinforcement,
because sensitive
people by nature
pick up on criticism so that
they can revise their behavior
and do better.
But if all they
get is criticism,
pretty soon they just
feel beaten down.
What I have noticed
about sensitive people
is that they do switch jobs,
sometimes whole careers.
Very often, they decide
to be self-employed.
>> For the beginning
of my career,
I always worked
for other people.
I was in an office
and I couldn't
stand to be in an office.
I couldn't stand the lighting, I
couldn't stand being cooped up,
I couldn't stand so many people.
And eventually, I
realized I really
need to find something
that I can do at home.
And my husband and I were
going back and forth, saying,
you know how can we do
something together as a couple,
and do something that will
help change the world, which
was a big thought.
But we really took it to task,
and DailyOM was born of that.
>> I so much enjoyed
meeting John Hughes.
He is such a perfect example
of a sensitive man triumphing
over adverse conditions.
In his case, a dominating
father who squelched all
emotion in himself and his son.
John has spent years
finding his true self.
But along the way, he became a
leader in the business world.
>> After a few years--
not even a few years,
probably 20-something years
of my career--
changing jobs every two to three
years, what I finally realized
is that channeling
that sensitivity
and that drive to kind
of craft my own career,
that's really what I was after.
I get to make a huge impact
in a short period of time.
I'm not locked into one company,
one management or leadership
style within a company.
And I can pick and
choose my clients.
And there's a freedom,
there's a huge risk
in being out on my own.
But at the same time, there's
a huge freedom as well.
And the freedom is what
I just absolutely love.
And so I guess what
I've really done
is take my drive and my
desires and my sensitivities
and I've been able to craft
a career that fits me to a T
>> John Hughes has been such a
successful CIO that he is now
in demand as an interim CIO,
while helping companies find
the right one, as
well as coaching CIOs.
He recently published a highly
praised book on leadership,
"Haunting the CEO."
In an article on why
HSPs make good leaders,
he says they miss nothing,
while falling back
to let team members shine.
And they have almost
an innate ability
to say and do the right
thing at just the right time.
His observations about
highly sensitive leaders
in the corporate environment are
similar to those of Dr. Maike
Andresen, a professor
in the renowned business
school at Bamberg
University in Germany,
and highly sensitive herself.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
I did some research about
highly sensitive person
regarding the motivation
to become a leader.
And I wanted to know whether a
highly sensitive person would
de-select themselves
from this role.
And what I found out so far
is that this is not the case.
So which is good.
So it's not that they fear or
are afraid to become a leader,
and I think there
are some strengths
that highly sensitive
leaders have.
So now the question is how they
can get into these positions.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Dr. Andresen helps
corporations notice and use
the strengths of highly
sensitive persons to create
an environment
that benefits both.
Such an environment
has been created
by the CEO Rupert Mayer of the
leading orchid growing company,
a family-owned
business in Germany.
>> When I worked together
with Rupert Mayer,
I was astonished to see how
sensitive he is and how well he
perceives his employees.
He has a very detailed view
about their personality.
And I was amazed.
I never saw that among managers.
So he is really
sensitive himself.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> So whenever
there are problems,
he is very good at detecting
these problems and in finding
the reasons, and then also in
finding good solutions in order
to solve these
challenges they have.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> In order to survive as a
manager on a long-term basis,
I think it is very important
these days to have a technical
competence, a social competence,
and sensitivity towards
colleagues who are considered
to be highly sensitive.
And that's a part of
social competence.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> When we communicate this
concept of high sensitivity,
I think there is one danger.
And the danger is
that people think
that we want to do
something for a minority,
and that they need special care
and special treatment, which
is not the case.
Because it is just a trait,
and some 20% have this trait,
and the 80% do not
have this trait.
And for me, it's more
a question of profiting
from the strengths of both
groups and to combine people,
and so that we can profit
from each other's personality
traits.
>> Certainly, the needs of
the highly sensitive require
attention if they're going
to stay in companies.
But both research
and the experience
of some business
people teaches us
that organizations
need both types.
How can we all work together--
parenting, in organizations,
or in marriage?
First, the highly sensitive must
value themselves so that they
can balance the other
80% and do their part,
their own particular part.
So what I want to know
is, what you teach
HSPs is about being empowered.
What do they need to know?
>> Oh great, that's
such a great question.
It's come to me over the years
sort of this metaphor of,
here we are in San
Francisco and California
and it's Highway 101--
I call it Highway 101.
It's like the dominant
culture-- there's six lanes,
everybody is going
fast, everybody
is got a destination to get to.
They're trying to
prove themselves.
And so that doesn't
work for we HSPs.
So I teach them that,
somewhere along this journey,
there's an exit.
And it's our own unique exit.
Like mine is Jacquelyn
103.25, yours is Elaine Aron.
We've got our own exit.
And it's a spiritual journey.
>> I like the idea of it
being a spiritual journey,
because understanding
sensitivity takes all of us
deeper into our actual true
self, whatever that is.
But we have also
seen that this is
a scientific journey, and a
journey for human culture.
>> Now the beautiful thing about
high sensitivity is that there
are a great deal of scientific
studies that support
the construct and how it relates
to other aspects of psychology.
And this is really
wonderful because if people
become engaged in
it and they allow
the ideas to enter
their lives, then
they'll be doing
something really important
for themselves, because they'll
be getting scientific evidence
that has value.
>> We now know that during these
early critical periods of great
susceptibility to environmental
influence that children are
enormously affected and set
on developmental trajectories
by their early experiences.
And the kinds of
support and care,
predictability, routines,
all of the things
that we think of as
giving appearance to life,
the more children
experience that, the better
families become, the
better communities become.
And I think in the long-run,
the better societies become.
>> I have always, always
listened to my daughter--
always.
Everything she felt,
everything she had to say
was important to me.
I would always get down
to her, I would always
look in the eyes, and I
would always, always listen.
>> This is probably the
happiest time in my life,
because I really have a good
understanding of who I am.
And I feel like
my sensitivity, I
view it more as a super
power than something that
is defect about me,
because it makes
me able to connect to people.
>> So I found that knowing that
other people were like this,
it removed a lot
of stress for me,
because then I was not
constantly thinking that, oh,
I'm not right, this isn't
how I'm supposed to be.
It made me realize that it's
OK for me to be like this
and people are like
how I am as well.
>> As I got older, it's
easier to accept myself
for the sensitivities
that I have.
Because I know,
at the same time,
those sensitivities have
really carved some things in me
that I just think are
just absolutely awesome.
And if I were to
point to just one,
it's the leadership aspect.
>> Oftentimes, it's the
sensitive people in our culture
who are the pioneers, who
are the oracles who see
into the future and see
what's coming in our culture.
And we don't give them enough
credit as guides to us,
but instead demean them because
they're different than we are.
>> What I would ask for from
the non-HSP would be mercy--
mercy and respect,
for the love of God,
just respect for how
much we as a trait,
as a community of sensitives,
how much we contribute.
>> Sensitivity clearly benefits
the 20% and the 80% alike.
But there's also the actuality
of differential susceptibility,
which means a sensitive gain
more from a good environment
and are most affected
by a poor one.
Right now, they are most noticed
by the other 80% when they
are being overly sensitive.
Those with happier
histories adapt and make
their valued contributions.
And only those close to
them know they're different
and that they grew up
feeling a little flawed.
Whatever their backgrounds,
however, the highly sensitive
see the subtle signs of what's
coming and think about it
deeply, more than others do.
Our world is going
through vast changes,
some of them frightening,
and many of them
not clearly understood.
We all need these
sensitive minds and hearts,
people like those
you've met here,
to study and reflect on
our world as it is now.
We really need them.
And to the highly sensitive,
I say, I beg you, speak out.
You now know you
are in good company.
We can support each other.
You are not the only one.
[MUSIC - ALANIS MORISSETTE,
"ORCHID"]
>> (SINGING) Not yet arrested,
and by that I mean betrothed,
though a start I
am newly courted.
I've just not been
trusted with alters.
I'm a sweet piece of work,
well-intentioned yet disturbed,
wrongly labeled and
under-fed, treated like a rose
as an orchid.
My friends, as they weigh in,
get understandably protective.
They have a hard
time being objective.
So inside we cancel
each other out.
I'm a sweet piece of work,
well-intentioned and unloved,
unlabeled and misunderstood,
treated like a rose
as an orchid.
You've brought water to me,
making sure my bloom rebounds.
You know best of what
my special care allows.